The Democratic Alliance (DA) in Musina is concerned that the lack of maintenance of the bulk water infrastructure by the Vhembe District Municipality (VDM) is resulting in avoidable shutdowns of the water supply to Musina. In a statement issued by the DA’s public representative councillor in the Musina Municipality, Cllr Reinhardt Fick, Fick lashed out at the VDM after water supply to this border town was cut off on 5 November without any prior warning. “There was no running water available in the town for four days in the midst of a heatwave,” said Fick. He added that residents living in higher lying areas confirmed that they have been without water for much longer. “The VDM is clearly failing in their mandate to provide and sustain a steady water supply to the residents of Musina. While the DA understands that the current drought brings about unforeseen challenges to the provision of water in the Musina, we take issue with VDM for the lack of timeous planning and lack of proactive measures to ensure an uninterrupted water supply to our town,” said Fick. He said that they have requested the VDM to address issues related to the provision of water with the utmost urgency. “We believe that the mismanagement of finite resources like water and maladministration should have no place in our country,” said Fick. In response to Musina’s sudden “day zero event”, VDM spokesperson Mr Matodzi Ralushai on Wednesday said that the water shortage was due to a contractor who broke the main supply line while busy preparing for the construction of new housing units. The contractor was appointed by Coghsta. “The consultant and the department were consulted in this regard. Our team have managed to restore the system, though there are some higher areas that still need to see a drop of water. The district is working on that process,” said Ralushai. Ralushai added that the last time water tankers were deployed in Musina was on 8 November.  “These tankers are in Musina even today,” said Ralushai. Apart from the unfortunate damage to the main supply line, Ralushai added that theft and vandalism of their water infrastructure contribute greatly to the chronic water shortages in the area. “There is theft and vandalism of our water services infrastructure almost every weekend and this is costing the VDM millions,” said Ralushai. The Musina area gets its water from boreholes with the Limpopo River as source. “It [the boreholes] is in ‘no man's land’ where soldiers are not allowed to operate. Thugs are extremely dangerous and are always armed, hence the security provided by the Musina Municipality are not able to deal with that,” said Ralushai. Apart from the chronic water shortages, sewage spills are also a major headache for residents. “The DA has laid three complaints with the Environmental Management Inspectors (Green Scorpions) over the handling of waste water by the VDM in Musina over the past three years. Sewage plants have not been fully operational for more than three years, while it is a common occurrence for waste water to flood pavements and spill over into the Limpopo River,” said Fick. Regarding both the water and sewage situation in Musina, Ralushai said that the VDM has done an assessment of the Musina water and sewer system. “The municipality still needs to source funding to upgrade and construct the new infrastructure,” Ralushai said. In the meantime, the DA has called on the VDM to install fixed water tanks in strategic areas in Musina including in the central business area to ensure reliable access to safe drinking water.