The Limpopo police’s efforts to address the province’s high crime rate seem to reflect a new sense of urgency, with almost 10 000 suspects being arrested the past month as part of several special joint police operations. These operations were conducted in various ways, including roadblocks, stop and searches, the raiding of illegal businesses, including liquor outlets, and the tracing of wanted suspects by members of several police units. Their efforts include, among others, crime prevention, crime intelligence, Public Order Police (POP), stock theft, detectives, highway patrol and the K9 Unit. During the past week’s operation alone (ending on 2 November), 1 687 suspects aged between 20 and 56 were arrested. Some of the items recovered during the operations included nine illegal firearms, as well as eight possible stolen vehicles. Also recovered were 10 cellphones, clothing and an amount of cash money, 294 835 sticks of counterfeit cigarettes, 31 dangerous weapons, 3 151 grams of dagga , 89 dagga plants, 2 grams of crystal meth, 25 grams of nyaope, 25 knives and about 1 300 litres of illegal liquor. A further 1 398 road traffic fines were issued while 35 shebeens were closed. During the first week of October (ending on 5 October), a total of 1 578 suspects were arrested and some of the major items recovered included 15 illegal firearms. The following week (ending on 11 October) saw the arrest of a further 2 159 suspects, as well as the recovery of two stolen vehicles and two illegal firearms. During week three of the special operations (ending on 19 October), the police arrested 1 925 suspects for crimes ranging from murder, attempted murder, robbery, possession of illicit cigarettes, contravention of the Immigration Act, possession of drugs (nyaope and dagga), rape, sexual assault, assault GBH, to burglary residential and business, stock theft, illegal mining, drug-related crime, driving under the influence of liquor, possession of illegal firearms and ammunition, illegal trading in liquor and the carrying of a dangerous weapon. Five vehicles, as well as 22 illegal firearms, were also recovered, while 47 shebeens were closed own. As for the police’s successes the past week (as well as for the rest of the month of October), provincial police commissioner Lieutenant General Nneke Ledwaba has praised all police members for their immeasurable commitment in eliminating crime across the province. The positive and meaningful results produced by these arrests are a clear indication that the police are leaving criminals little room to manoeuvre. 