With International Men’s Day being celebrated today (19 November), Ms Friede Meissenheimer, senior social worker of the Louis Trichardt SAVF (South African Women’s Federation), urged families to take extra good care of the men in their lives. International Men’s Day takes place annually on 19 November and the six pillars of International Men’s Day are designed to promote positive role models; to celebrate men’s positive contributions to society; to focus on men’s health and wellbeing; to highlight discrimination against men; to improve gender relations and promote gender equality; and to create a safer, better world. “The theme for 2020 is ‘Better health for Men and Boys’. With the year being as unpredictable and challenging as it was, mental health was one of the biggest areas of focus. Feeling isolated from family and friends, job losses and financial insecurity all contributed to an increase in mental health issues, such as depression and anxiety,” said Meissenheimer. She added that, in general, men were much less likely to talk about mental health issues. “The perception is often that men need to be strong, and having depression is unfortunately still seen as a weakness by many people. However, any person can be affected by depression,” said Meissenheimer. Regarding this, she added that on 2 April 2018, Dwayne “The Rock” Johnson had tweeted: “We all go through the same sludge, and depression never discriminates. Took me a long time to realise, but the key is to not be afraid to open up. Especially us dudes have a tendency to keep it in. You’re not alone”. Meissenheimer gave some helpful tips to find out whether someone you care about is suffering from depression. The most common symptoms are feeling sad or empty most of the time; loss of interest or pleasure in activities that were once enjoyed; feeling hopeless about life; feeling helpless or guilty; changes in sleeping habits; changes in eating habits; loss of energy or feeling fatigued; restlessness, irritability or anger; difficulty concentrating; and thoughts of death or suicide. “If you recognise these symptoms in yourself or someone you care about, please make an appointment with a GP or psychologist for further assistance,” urged Meissenheimer. She said that people were also welcome to contact the local SAVF on 015 516 3841 or 071 628 7949 for more help. 