The Louis Trichardt SPCA’s annual auction fundraiser on 6 November was a night to remember, especially for the local SPCA, who managed to almost triple the amount they were expecting to raise. “We were absolutely blown away by our community’s support and generosity once again, especially in a year that brought with it so many challenges,” said local SPCA spokesperson Alicia Thomas. She said they were overwhelmed and honestly left speechless with the support they got from ticket sales, donations towards the catering, sponsorship of prizes, people’s time and also by everyone who bid on the amazing prizes as well. In total, they managed to raised R160 000. “These two small words – thank you – will never be enough!” said Alicia. The evening was packed with delicious food, good fun, lots of laughs, fantastic prizes, great people and an unforgettable show by Bernice West. “Thank you to Bernice West and her whole team; it was such a pleasure working with you all. Then a huge thank you, once again, to Anri Fourie from 139 on Munnik who sponsored their accommodation free of charge. A special thank you goes out to Northgate Lodge and their entire team,” said Alicia. Alicia also thanked the auctioneer for the evening, Phillip Potgieter. “You never disappoint and not only had the audience in stitches, but also helped to raise much-needed money for our SPCA and our animals,” said Alicia. The venue looked stunning and it was all done out of love and a shared passion for animals by Adri Viviers. The layout of the food and the décor, everything looked picture perfect. “To Kobus van Dyk from Isis Décor - another big thank you for the beautiful items you supplied at a very generous rate, so Adri could work her magic,” said Alicia. She also thanked DJ Jonty for his excellent, friendly service. “Then to our local newspaper, the Zoutpansberger. Thank you for your continued, loyal support to our SPCA. Thank you for allowing us to be a part of every single issue, for all your stories and publications; we honestly have such a huge appreciation for all you do and publish for our SPCA,” said Alicia. So many other sponsors and people made the evening special and Alicia urged residents to please support these businesses and persons. The complete list of sponsors is available on the local SPCA’s Facebook page by going to the link: https://www.facebook.com/media/set?vanity=109664612517237&set=a.1765292530287762. Readers are also invited to check out local SPCA chairperson Lesley Gaigher’s auction video about the work they do. This year, one of the featured cases in the video is Adira – the dog that was found tied up with cable ties and left for dead in the forestry plantation just outside Louis Trichardt. “Adira has been in foster care and her wounds, physical and emotional, are on the mend. She is now ready to be adopted into her forever, loving home where she can live out her golden years enveloped in love and affection, never to be discarded like rubbish, ever again! Please help us to find Adira her special home and family too, so that she can flash that brilliant smile of hers for the rest of her happy days,” said Alicia. Below is the video:  2020 SPCA Louis Trichardt Auction Video from Lesley Gaigher on Vimeo.  “Thank you to our loyal supporters, everyone who attended our auction or purchased items. We will never be able to do what we do without your continuous support. My final thank you goes out to our exceptional SPCA team, to our whole committee, our inspector Lawrence Khodobo, our SPCA staff and to every single volunteer,” said Alicia. Members of the public who wish to financially support the hard and most often heart-breaking work the Louis Trichardt SPCA does, can do so by making payments into the following bank account: SPCA Louis Trichardt, Standard Bank Louis Trichardt, cheque account number 282 374 639 with branch code 052549. 