Commuters in the Vhembe District have expressed appreciation for the fact that taxi associations operating in the district are not increasing their fares. From the beginning of the lockdown, the taxi industry’s operations were limited in terms of time restrictions and not being allowed to load to full capacity. The industry was hit hard by the lockdown regulations. In some regions, commuters are reportedly paying more than double the original fare. The reason for the increase is that taxi operators would like to offset their losses. According to News 24, taxi operators claim not to have received the promised Covid-19 relief funds from the government. Limpopo Mirror/Zoutpansberger spoke to commuters using buses or minibus taxis to be at work or for any other business in Louis Trichardt. From Musina to Louis Trichardt, coming and going back costs R120. A lady from Musina who regularly commutes to Louis Trichardt said she was still paying the same amount. "I really thank the taxi operators from Musina to Louis Trichardt for keeping the fares the same as before the lockdown. Any increase would push me out of business," said the 38-year-old lady. She sells assorted of items at a taxi rank in Louis Trichardt and commutes three times per week for her business. Another lady commuting from Madombidzha to town, using buses, said she had had no other source of income since the lockdown. She had to live off her child’s social grant. Her monthly bus ticket costs R380. She is happy that the fare is the same. "Although I do not pocket as much money as I used to do before, at least with the fares not having increased, I can eke out a living," she said. Justice Baloyi from Tshikota sells pap and beef at the taxi rank in Louis Trichardt CBD. He is also happy that taxi fares have not increased. Before and after the lockdown, the taxi fare is R10 for a single trip. His wife assists him in serving his customers. "We are still nursing the lockdown losses. These taxi operators have their customers’ interests at heart. If they had increased [the fare], we would be walking every day from Tshikota to town and back,” said Baloyi. He [Baloyi] also has a heart for taxi operators. "I think the government should let the taxis load at full capacity to offset losses. There must be stricter penalties for anyone not adhering to Covid-19 safety, such as wearing a mask and being sanitised as one gets into the taxi," said Baloyi. Meanwhile, last week, Mr Fikile Mbalula, Minister of Transport, said he was aware of the challenges faced by the taxi industry because of the regulations to curb the spread of Covid-19. He said fair fare adjustments might be necessary for the industry’s survival. However, Mbalula urged taxi associations to be mindful of the poor when redetermining fares. 