What an extraordinary time this has been for our country, for our parents and for our learners. “When we were warned that schools were likely to close early last term, we halted the report-writing process and prepared 10 days’ worth of hard copy work as a stopgap. We never dreamed how long the lockdown would go on for, but this work certainly bought us time, enabling our schools to establish online platforms, so that learning could go on,” said Dionne Redfern, executive head of Ridgeway College, Ridgeway Preparatory and the Early Childhood Development (ECD) Centre. Redfern said that no pre-existing infrastructure had been in place at all for this. “But to save our school and our pupils, we worked tirelessly to train ourselves and then our pupils in the use of Google Suite and Seesaw for our little people. We were also meticulous in collecting updated email and phone number details to ensure connectivity with our pupils and parents. Once we had our pupils online, it became apparent that some of our pupils were ignoring our messages and not doing the work – as children do,” said Redfern. Using their tutoring system, they could, however, have contact with their pupils, but the missing link was that they did not have a quick and easy way to communicate with parents. “This was solved by the establishment of a parent contact group with every tutor. Throughout the week, missing work is reported, and on a Friday, the tutor can notify the parents of any work that is outstanding. In addition, we use these groups to send Covid-19 updates and newsletters. An online timetable was devised to ensure pupils have access to lessons and to teachers at given times,” said Redfern. After much deliberation, private schools were granted permission to re-open, with the Grade 12 and Grade 7 classes returning to school on 1 June. After 10 weeks in lockdown, Ridgeway College’s Grade 12 class and Ridgeway Preparatory School’s Grade 7 class finally came back to school. “The rest of the school came back in a staggered return. We have re-arranged timetables to split classes, to alternate days with the junior grades and to teach in ‘bubbles’ to avoid as much contact as possible,” said Redfern. Students, for the most part, remain in a classroom designated to them, while the teachers move around. Some students were afraid to be at school but soon relaxed and settled down after being shown what was expected of them in terms of sanitising, wearing masks and keeping the required distance. “This is not an easy task to monitor, and we constantly patrol the campus to ensure compliance,” said Redfern. Online teaching continues at Ridgeway for those who are sick at home or for those who have comorbidity conditions that exclude them from returning. “In summary, our pupils have been receiving work every day since 14 April, and our entire school is back. Much has been learnt about self-motivation; about taking responsibility and accountability for one’s learning; about online ethics; about resilience in the face of this global pandemic,” said Redfern. 