Nature lovers are overjoyed after South Africa National Parks (SANParks) have now decided to allow self-drive excursions for day visitors as from Monday, 8 June, in parks that cater for self-drives. SANParks spent most of last week preparing for the expected arrivals of guests at parks. “We appreciate that, after two months of confinement, the public is keen to engage with nature and the excitement as shown by enquiries from our loyal visitors is encouraging. We are obligated to ensure that the opening of our national parks for self-drive excursions is done under the strictest health protocols to safeguard both our staff and guests,” said SANParks CEO Fundisile Mketeni in a press release. As a result, said Mketeni, they are limiting face-to-face contact between staff and guests by encouraging online and telephonic day-visit bookings and full payment of conservation fees prior to arrival, where possible. Bookings can be made at 012 428 9111 or at www.sanparks.org from Monday 8 June. In the case of Wild Card members, guests have to ensure that their membership is valid prior to arrival. According to Mketeni, the Namaqua National Park as well as Boulders and Cape Point in Table Mountain National Park will remain closed for the time being and the majority of gates at Kruger National Park will be open, with the exception of the Pafuri and Numbi gates. Gate quotas for Kruger have been revised to approximately one third of what they were prior to the lockdown. Three time slots for arrival will be introduced, with the understanding that booked day visitors must arrive at the gate within that time span. Slot 1 is from 06:00 to 08:00, Slot 2 from 08:00 to 10:00 and Slot 3 from 10:00 onwards. Hides and picnic spots at all parks remain closed; braaiing at picnic sites will also not be allowed during this period. Ablutions will be open in camps, at gates and at some picnic spots. A limited number of shops and petrol stations will be open in some parks during the course of the week and will be operated in accordance with relevant Level 3 lockdown regulations. Further information and updates will be available on their website on Monday 8 June 2020. The national lockdown regulations relating to movement between provinces must be observed within the parks. “This means inter-provincial travel within parks that stretch between two provinces will not permitted. Guests therefore must exit into the province from which they entered the park,” said Mketeni. He said everything as people knew it had been fundamentally changed by COVID-19, “therefore we are requesting guests to adhere to all official alert level 3 regulations when inside the parks, including wearing masks, keeping social distancing, and following transport capacity directives. We also implore guests not to deposit their litter inside the bins within the parks but to leave with as much of it as hygienically possible”. 