The management of the Kruger National Park (KNP) has reminded day visitors to the park to continue to adhere to the Covid-19 health protocols as outlined by the government, especially regarding the social distancing aspect when travelling for self-drive excursions. National parks, of which the KNP is one, opened their gates on 8 June after the country moved to Level 3 of the lockdown. The managing executive of the KNP, Gareth Coleman, said in a press release the general feedback from regular visitors was that they were delighted that the park was open for them again, even though they could not sleep over. “We are in unchartered waters with Covid-19 and had to get all hands on deck to make sure that those visiting had a good experience. It was important for us to orientate our colleagues at the front line on the health protocols around the virus, so that they could assist and safeguard our visitors and employees. The issue of PPEs, training and the recording of personal details of visitors went as envisaged and we are grateful for the massive cooperation from our clients,” said Coleman. The guidelines to adhere to during self-drives in the KNP are as follows: * Maintain social distancing by at least two metres (2m). * Notwithstanding the requirement that day visitors in one vehicle must be from the same household, limitations on vehicle capacity and number of occupants must be firmly enforced upon entry at gates. The restriction is that occupants may not exceed more than 70% of capacity and we request visitors to adhere, so they are not turned back at the gates. * Guests are advised to book in advance (preferably online, if possible) in order to assist in planning as strict quota management will apply; with the understanding that booked day visitors must arrive at the gate within that time span. There are three times slots for entry into the park. They are 06.00 to 08:00 (Time Slot 1), 08:00 to 10:00 (Time Slot 2) and from 10:00 onwards (Time Slot 3). For online bookings visitors can visit www.sanparks.org Those who are in possession of firearms should declare them at the gate, so that they can be sealed upon entry; break the seal when departing. “At the moment, picnic spots are only to be used for ablutions as no braaiing is allowed under the current regulations. The restaurants and park shops will be open for takeaways only. Finally, the quota system will be in place at all gates to ensure compliance in terms of numbers inside the park and to enhance visitors’ experience,” said Coleman. 