SANParks announced on Wednesday that the Kruger National Park (KNP) would partially open some of its camps for accommodation as from Friday, 14 August. In a press release, the KNP management advises those with confirmed bookings to be aware that the regulations stipulated in the protocols around the easing of travel and leisure accommodation restrictions will be enforced strictly. Travellers may only overnight in their province of residence. If they are from Limpopo, their booking must be for KNP rest camps in Limpopo. If guests are uncertain about the locale of the rest camp they are staying in, the booking agents available via central reservations on 012 428 9111 will be able to offer assistance. Within the KNP, the Olifants River is recognised as the boundary between Mpumalanga and Limpopo. The following rest camps and accommodation facilities are in the Limpopo Province: Pafuri Border Camp, Punda Maria Rest Camp, Sirheni Bushveld Camp, Shingwedzi Rest Camp, Bateleur Bushveld Camp, Mopani Rest Camp, Shipandani Overnight Hide, Tsendze Rustic Camp, Boulders Bush Lodge, Shimuwini Bushveld Camp, Sable Overnight Hide, Letaba Rest Camp and Olifants Rest Camp. (Please note that Punda Maria, Shingwedzi and Letaba will reopen few days later, on 20 August 2020). The following rest camps and accommodation facilities are in the Mpumalanga province: Balule Camp, Roodewal Bush Lodge, Satara Rest Camp, Tamboti Tent Camp, Talamati Bushveld Camp, Skukuza Rest Camp, Pretoriuskop Rest Camp, Berg-en-Dal Rest Camp, Malelane Camp, Biyamiti Bushveld Camp, Lower Sabie Rest Camp and Crocodile Bridge Rest Camp. (Please note that Satara and Pretoriuskop will reopen few days later, on 17 August 2020). The managing executive of the KNP, Gareth Coleman, said the park was ready to welcome back overnight guests, but that this would be done in phases. “As the regulations of Covid-19 continuously change, it is imperative that we as KNP also adjust to make sure that those who will be visiting enjoy their experience, regardless of the pandemic. The issue of PPE, training, and the recording of personal details of visitors will be strictly adhered to. We are pleading with our clients to work with the gate and camp staff members on the observation of Health Protocols around the virus for safety,” said Coleman. The guidelines to adhere to during the intra-travel overnight stay in the KNP are as follows: * Maintain social distancing by at least 2m at all times. * Limitations on vehicle capacity and number of occupants will be firmly enforced upon entry at gates. The restriction is that occupants may not exceed more than 70% of capacity and we request visitors to adhere, so they are not turned back at the gates. * Guests visiting the park must wear masks in the public areas as this is compulsory in South Africa; the driver of the vehicle must also ensure all passengers travelling with them adhere to this. Coleman concluded by wishing all those who will be in the KNP a safe and enjoyable stay, and to make good memories. “We also implore guests not to deposit their litter inside the bins within the parks but to leave with as much of it as hygienically possible.” 