The Department of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development (DAFF) announced last week that quarantine had been lifted on nine locations, with 10 properties remaining under quarantine for foot-and-mouth disease (FMD). “Our veterinary services are continuously working with the affected farmers to resolve the remaining 10 farms, and good progress is being made in this regard,” said the DAFF in a press release. On 1 November 2019, veterinary services were alerted to clinical signs suspicious for FMD in a herd of cattle on a farm in the Molemole district (Dendron area) of Limpopo. The outbreak followed on the heels of another FMD outbreak in Limpopo earlier last year when the DAFF confirmed the presence of FMD in Limpopo’s Vhembe District on 7 January 2019. As a result, South Africa lost its World Organisation for Animal Health (OIE) recognised foot-and-mouth-disease-free zone without vaccination status. This had disastrous consequences for both the local and international meat export markets. Regarding the outbreak in the Dendron area, 19 locations eventually tested positive for FMD. “The last positive location reported to the OIE was on 26 February 2020 and no new positive locations have been identified since. On most of the affected locations, more than six months have passed since the last clinical cases, which is a very encouraging sign that the outbreak was successfully controlled,” said the DAFF. The DAFF confirmed that Botswana has lifted the ban on export of live cattle from South Africa. It said that the import conditions for export of cattle to Botswana had been revised and a health certificate had been agreed upon. FMD-specific import conditions include isolation of animals for at least 30 days whilst preparing for export under supervision of the Veterinary Authority and testing for FMD during this time. “The agreed-upon conditions were provided to the provincial veterinary services and potential exporters are advised to contact their local state veterinarian to familiarise themselves with the requirements for exporting cattle to Botswana,” said the DAFF. According to the DAFF, most trade partners have retained the negotiated agreements for safe commodities. Updated information has been supplied to the veterinary authorities to provide assurances on the continued safe trade of commodities. The DAFF reassured members of the public that FMD is not contagious to humans and the meat from animals that have recovered from the disease is safe for human consumption. “Permission was granted to nine feedlots for the safe slaughter of animals from affected premises at two abattoirs designated for this purpose. This process is continuing and more than 11 000 animals from farms under quarantine have been safely processed. Once all animals on affected properties have been slaughtered, quarantine can be lifted and the farming operations can resume,” said the DAFF. Livestock owners and traders are again strongly advised to take “buyer beware” precautions and to maintain basic biosecurity measures on their farms. These measures will also prevent outbreaks of other contagious diseases in your animals, including Brucellosis in cattle and African Swine Fever in the case of pigs. The most important points to remember remain: * Only buy animals from known and proven sources; * Insist on a veterinary health declaration before animals are brought onto your farms; and * Always place new arrivals in isolation until you can satisfy yourself of their health status. Do not: * move animals that show signs of disease; * buy animals from unknown origin; * buy animals originating from known infected areas; and * allow visitors and buyers to have contact with your animals without proper disinfection of their hands, shoes and anything that could transmit the virus. “The department wishes to thank the livestock industries, the veterinary officials on the ground and the affected farmers for their concerted effort and cooperation,” said the DAFF. 