SANParks issued a statement on Tuesday, aimed at clarifying how it will manage overnight accommodation at its various national parks, following President Cyril Ramaphosa’s announcement over the weekend that the country is to move to Covid-19 alert level two from midnight on 17 August. According to SANParks CEO Fundisile Mketeni, a risk-adjusted strategy to save lives has been at the core of every sector or industry’s planning as economic activities gradually start opening. “In dealing with the expected accommodation bookings influx, SANParks has aligned itself with a similar strategy for overnight bookings, particularly for inter-provincial travellers to national parks,” said Mketeni. Mketeni said the Gazette 43620 issued on Monday, 17 August, stipulated that all accommodation establishments restrict the number of persons allowed in such establishments to not more than 50% of the facility.  “Practically, this means that SANParks will be obligated to amend or cancel bookings in parks and camps that are currently booked beyond that capacity and, in addition, to reject new bookings that may lead to our operating above the regulated 50% threshold,” said Mketeni. Mketeni said that while SANParks understood the inconvenience and the frustration this would create, their reservations team were on hand to assist with regard to reallocating bookings from one camp to another within the same park to ensure that they were operating in adherence to the law at all times. According to Mketeni, in instances where a paid forward booking has to be cancelled, SANParks will apply a transparent and fair process of LIFO (last-in-first-out) principle “implying that the person that booked earlier will receive preference over someone that booked later”. Mketeni said affected guests would be contacted and offered alternative facilities or alternative dates “and no guests will be charged cancellation fees if an eventual cancellation occurs and is due to Covid-19-related circumstances”. In conclusion, Mketeni said this period in time had called on every person to make individual and collective sacrifices in minimising the risk of the spread of Covid-19. He urged guests to the national parks to appreciate that the regulations and SANParks’ own protocols, as inconvenient as they might seem, were geared towards a greater and common good. 