The Early Childhood Development (ECD) Centre at Ridgeway College in Louis Trichardt received an upgrade in the form of some stunning murals last week. “Given that it is a brand-new building, it was already a light, airy space, but it lacked sparkle. Thanks to the drive and motivation of the ECD staff and the Ridgeway Preparatory School head, Mr Jannie le Roux, we now have age-appropriate murals that enhance the space,” said Ridgeway’s executive head, Ms Dionne Redfern. Redfern said that the value of an ECD centre could not be underestimated. She said that experts considered the foundation phase as laying the building blocks for the rest of a child’s schooling, and indeed they did. Engaging in the seemingly trivial tasks of playing, drawing, colouring, cutting, and painting, one could undervalue how critical these skills are. Redfern asserted that “a competent teacher will spot immediately if there are fine motor co-ordination skills that are lacking, if a pencil grip is poor, if there are depth-perception issues, low muscle tone, problems crossing the mid-line or underlying eyesight or hearing impediments. The longer such barriers are left, the harder they are to resolve. Nipping them in the bud and providing the right interventions and support are imperative or these issues are magnified in later years.” A proper ECD offers more than that, however. “There is a delightful innocence and creativity in these little people,” said Redfern, “and the murals reminded me of the pivotal role that art plays in the development of our pupils. We talk about the need for 21st -century learners to be adaptable, flexible and creative, and yet so many schools cancel the very subject that fosters creativity, helps with visual learning and gives an outlet for the expression of emotion.” Art, said Redfern, is another language and sometimes, when words fail us, art speaks for us. “The scribblings of a Grade RR class, in a few short years, translate to greater skill and perhaps a genuine talent being discovered. That talent might lead to a career as an artist or graphic designer or photographer or architect … who knows!” said Redfern. She concluded that, in the words of Einstein: “Imagination is more important than knowledge. Knowledge is limited. Imagination encircles the world.” 