The Democratic Alliance (DA) launched a provincial Court Watching Briefs Unit in Limpopo on Monday as a means to specifically assist victims and families of victims of farm attacks and to put those attackers behind bars. “The situation in our rural areas is now at a crisis point, with a sharp rise in terrible attacks and murders in June and July. There were nine farm attacks in Limpopo recorded for July 2020, one of which was a murder of a foreman on a farm outside Marble Hall,” said Jacques Smalle, provincial leader of the DA in a press release. Smalle said that the horrific triple homicide in the Northern Cape a week ago had shaken the farming community nationwide. Protesting farmers and farm workers lined the roads last Thursday as the five arrested suspects made their first appearance in court. “Despite this success by the SAPS, who ran a hitherto unseen Rolls-Royce operation which resulted in the five arrests, the National Director of Public Prosecutions, Advocate Shamila Batohi, says the Criminal Justice system is buckling in the face of rising crime and dismally low prosecution rates. Indeed, last year, prosecution rates for serious offences were as low as 2%,” said Smalle. The Watching Briefs initiative was introduced by the Department of Community Safety in the DA-led Western Cape to act in accordance with the constitutional provisions contained in Section 206 (3) of the Constitution, which provides that every province is entitled to monitor police conduct and report inefficiencies. The work of the Western Cape unit successfully prevents cases being dropped from the roll and helps achieve convictions. The DA's Rural Safety Watching Briefs Unit will act as an unofficial go-between between the police, the prosecution services, and the victims of farm attacks to stand beside the victims of these horrific crimes and assist them through the often daunting police and court processes. “As Head of the Limpopo Rural Safety Court Watching Briefs Unit, I will act in the best interests of a victim or victims of a farm attack and as a go-between between the police, the prosecution, the victims or other involved persons or parties, in order to facilitate the proceedings and to achieve an optimum outcome. This has achieved great success in the Western Cape, and attackers are seen to receive life sentences on a regular basis,” said Smalle. He added that their approach will be a method of assisting the various state entities, along with victims, to achieve, as unobtrusively as possible, a quick, just outcome of any investigation or prosecution. The watching brief can and should monitor police conduct; monitor the effectiveness and efficiency of the police service; promote good relations between the police and the community; assess the effectiveness of visible policing; and liaise with the shadow cabinet member responsible for policing or prosecutions with respect to crime, policing, and prosecutions. “One of our own councillors, herself a farmer, was brutally attacked over five years ago, and despite DNA proof, and endless court appearances, the alleged attacker is still free and living near her. Why and how could this possibly happen in South Africa today? What chance does a farmer have to see justice done if he, his family, a farm manager, a farmworker or a visitor to the farm is attacked or murdered?” asked Smalle. With the Rural Safety Watching Briefs initiatives, the DA hopes to improve those chances. “I call on all South Africans to visit the DA's websites at stopplaasaanvalle.co.za or stopfarmattacks.co.za and co-sign our open letter to President Cyril Ramaphosa, calling on him to address the plight of our farming communities,” said Smalle. 