Motorists traveling on the N1 between Louis Trichardt and Musina must have noticed by now the “spaza shop” right where the R525 Tshipise road meets the N1 at Bokmakierie. The “spaza” is right next to the road and dangerously close to the N1 intersection, yet the authorities do not seem to be bothered by the possible danger this structure holds for motorists as it has been there for weeks. Numerous farmers in the area have indicated that they have reported the matter to the authorities, but nothing is being done as the “owner” of the shack seems to be somewhat untouchable. “Just the past week, a truck stopped in the middle of the road to go buy ‘pap & vleis’ at the spaza, and motorists literally had to drive around the truck,” said one farmer. The Zoutpansberger asked SANRAL whether they were aware of the presence of the structure and whether people were allowed to erect such structures on a road reserve. “No, it is not allowed. It contravenes Sections 48 and 52 of the SANRAL Act of 1998. In some cases, it may also contravene local municipal by-laws,” said Mr Vusi Mona, SANRAL’s national spokesperson. Asked whether special circumstances existed in which permission could be granted for the erection of such a structure, Mona said that they did not ordinarily allow structures inside the road reserve. “However, if such permission is given, it must be done under Section 48 of the Act mentioned above,” said Mona. He added that a person could be fined or imprisoned or both for erecting such a structure on the road reserve. That SANRAL has people monitoring their national routes is a well-known fact, which begs the question: Why has nobody said or done anything about the problem? “SANRAL has service providers (consultants and contractors) who are appointed to look after the national roads, including reporting any illegal activity within the road reserve. We will investigate whether this has been reported to our Statutory Control team,” said Mona. Regarding jurisdiction, Mona said that they would have to determine whether the structure was inside the SANRAL road reserve before taking any action. “The first step is to request the owners of the illegal structure to remove their structure. If they refuse, a legal route is taken. SANRAL does not have a law-enforcement unit and therefore does not physically remove structures inside the road reserve. This action is taken by the law-enforcement authorities,” said Mona. In the meantime, Mona urged the public to report any problems they encounter along national and provincial routes. “There are sign boards displaying contact numbers for our Route Managers along the national roads, which people can use for reporting such cases. Alternatively, road users may ring the regional office in Pretoria on 012 426 6200,” said Mona. 