The world of sports currently has very little to look forward to with the Covid-19 pandemic pretty much putting a stop to everything, including the local Premier Soccer League, the Super Rugby tournaments - basically all other local, national and international sports. Fear not, however, as plans for the annual ZZ2 Kremetart Cycle Race are still going ahead in the Soutpansberg. This popular race will celebrate its 30th anniversary this year. According to the race organisers, they have read all press statements of various initiatives, races, companies, organs of state and, ultimately, the concerns of fellow cyclists and they appreciate the seriousness of the outbreak of the virus. “Major concern, panic and fear are racing through the veins of the people of our country. We further appreciate the fact that all races and events scheduled until the end of April are suspended; however, the ZZ2 Kremetart will not take any decision lightly and will most definitely not raise any havoc among the cyclists,” the organisers said. The organizers added that, at the end of the day, cyclists wanted to race, partake and ultimately enjoy the festivities and heart-warming Limpopo African sun while taking on the most amazing one-day four-stage race. “Obviously, should the pandemic continue to spread and further limitations be imposed on the overseeing bodies that regulate us, then, and only then, shall we take an informed decision, well in advance of the race. That being said, the ZZ2 Kremetart will continue,” said the race organisers. The 175km One-Day Stage Race will once again be the main event on 6 June. In addition, the popular 70km and 35km races will also take place, while the Kiddie’s Race again promises much fun for the little ones. Online entries have already opened and for more information and to enter, visit http://www.kremetartcycling.co.za/ “In the meantime, please stay safe and virus free. We don’t want to lose any cyclists at the ZZ2 Kremetart. Your warm welcome, potjie and free beer await,” said the organizers. 