515 Squadron at Air Force Base (AFB) Makhado came under new command last week, with Lt Col Motubatse Ephry Kgoale handing over command to Lt Col Lord Isaac Montsho. In accepting command of this security squadron, Montsho pledged to perform his duties with zeal and diligence and promised to set a good example to those under his command. The changing-of-command parade took place on 5 March and the guests of honour included members of the South African Air Force (SAAF) Command Council, the Deputy Chief of the SAAF, Maj-Gen Mzayifani Buthelezi, and the Chief of Air Staff Governance, Maj-Gen Motshabi Sehloho. Brig-Gen André Barends, the Officer Commanding of AFB Makhado, officiated as the review officer during the event. Lt Col Kgoale served as the commander of 515 Squadron from 1 January 2016 until 31 December 2019 and was appointed as the training coordinator of the SAAF Gymnasium in Hoedspruit with effect from 1 January 2020. Lt Col Montsho was born in Brits and completed his high school career at the Ikatisong Comprehensive School in Letlhabile. He joined the South African Air Force on 6 January 1992 as a national service man. The change of office between the Base Regimental Sergeant Majors - Master Warrant Officer (MWO) Johan Jonas, who handed over the reins of office to his successor, MWO William Windvogel - took place at the same time. MWO Jonas has been appointed the Ceremonial Warrant Officer of the South African Air Force with effect from 1 January 2020. In his address, Brig Gen Barends urged members of the South African Air Force (SAAF), and in particular of AFB Makhado, to remain strong and loyal, to be disciplined and professional, to humble themselves, and to work as a team. He told them to do their best to support the core business of the SAAF, adding that to achieve this, the participation, commitment and dedication from all men and women in uniform at the base were required, irrespective of what they did. He said doing so would strengthen the capability of the organisation. 