The Department of Water and Sanitation urged residents of Limpopo to use water sparingly as dam levels are showing no improvement. The department said in a statement issued on Wednesday that the Limpopo dams continued to experience a decline week on week. “This is according to the latest weekly report issued by the Department of Water and Sanitation, which shows that the dam levels are currently sitting at 60.9% this week, taking a slight dive from 61.3% last week,” said the department. According to the department, some parts of Limpopo have been experiencing acute water challenges. To this end, the department is working with its controlling body, Lepelle Water Board, and has dispatched water tanks and tankers to various municipalities. In the Vhembe District, the Nandoni Dam, which is supplied by the Levhuvhu River, is sitting at high level of 99.5% this week, compared to last week’s 99%. The Vondo Dam has experienced a sharp decrease to 91.0% this week, compared to last week’s level of 94.6%. De Hoop Dam in Steelpoort, which supplies the community of Sekhukhune and the local mining industries, is at 92.4%, showing a slight decrease compared to last week’s level of 92.54%. Flag Boshielo has also declined this week to 93%, compared to last week’s 94%. The dam has, however, experienced a huge improvement compared to last year around this time when it was 58.8% full. The weekly report further states that Ebenezer Dam in Groot Letaba, which supplies the majority of the communities around Polokwane, continued to decline from 12.8% last week to 12.7% this week. Tzaneen Dam, which supplies water for farmers for irrigation in the area, has also experienced a slight decrease to 12.2%, compared to last week’s 12.7%. “The Department of Water and Sanitation calls on farmers to be cautious when using water as the dam level is not increasing and the farmers’ produce will be affected if the dam runs dry,” warned the department. Glen Alpine Dam in Mogalakwena is also at a critical low of 10% this week, compared to last week’s 10.2%. The critically low Doorndraai Dam in the Sterk River is also on a downward spiral at 9.6% this week, compared to last week’s 9.9%. Mokolo Dam in the Mokolo River also experienced a decline to 45.8% this week, compared to last week’s 46.7%. 