Residents of Louis Trichardt and surrounds had the opportunity to add their voices to the thousands of others on Saturday, 5 September, in support of the ever-growing Move One Million campaign. Residents took part in a “slow drive” through Louis Trichardt, almost bringing the town centre to a standstill. This was in support of the Move One Million awareness campaign aimed at uniting South Africans at home and abroad, to take hands in uniting as a non-gender, -colour, -creed or -religion nation, pushing forward to bring about change and #DirectElections by the people. “Literally to Move One Million to achieve this objective. We stand for change of the status quo of a failed governing body with corruption, poverty and a total collapse of the economy of a once economically strong South Africa, known as the bread basket of the African continent, world leaders in many fields and especially of science and medicine,” states Jarette Petzer in a media release. He is the founder of the movement and of the #I’mStaying campaign. “Our aim is to move one million people ... and then to inspire 10 million, and we will not stop until all South Africa’s  59 million people stand united as South Africans, working together to make the prosperous Rainbow Nation a reality,” added Petzer. The message on Saturday was clear: Enough is enough! “Government has clearly failed all South Africans, in all spheres of life. Crime and corruption, lawlessness affecting everyone in every spectrum of life. The violence, rape, and murders, affecting all people in all areas of society … are extending to both towns and cities nationwide! All crimes of violence, rape and murder continue to escalate each year, as unemployment figures continue to rise, only serving to exacerbate the situation,” said Petzer. “We feel the government failed us, each and every one of us. We grow tired of being patient while the corruption, lawlessness, farm murders, and poverty grow worse by the day. We want the nation to unite and stand up against the failures of the government. We need direct elections,” added one of the local organizers, Kim Harris. Other local organisers of the local event included Kim Labuschagne, Malie du Plessis, and Inga Gilfillan. 