The annual IsAbility golf day was decided at the Soutpansberg Golf Club on Saturday, 12 September, and despite the Covid-19 restrictions, was once again a great success. “We are really thankful for the support from so many quarters that our golf day received. In spite of the coronavirus and level-two lockdown regulations, we had 40 players and almost as many volunteers and supporters,” said organiser Sandy James. IsAbility is a sports club that supports development of differently abled athletes, as well as able-bodied athletes.  Funds raised during Saturday’s golf day will be used for their project Fit-to-Fly to provide standing and sitting frames to mobility-impaired patients locally. The four-ball-alliance scramble drive was won by the Surat team with 110 points. “The success of the day was the unity of energy that was evident. Once again our IsAbility visitors from Gauteng commented on how amazing the energy is that we have within the Louis Trichardt community. We are thankful to the Lord Jesus Christ for enabling such united energy. With the proceeds from the day we are going to be able to fit at least four cerebral palsied children with standing frames and initiate a local manufacturing process for the frames,” said Sandy. More importantly, she added, awareness was created about the reality of the needs of disabled members of the community. “Little by little we can gain ground as more and more people join hands to reach out to the physically disabled. There are still those in our community who are living with a disability and feel marginalized. They are free to get in touch with us,” said Sandy. Sandy and the IsAbility expressed their gratitude towards all the sponsors who made the day possible. They were Jandrell and Swanepoel, Surat, Purely Water, Motion Fitness Gym, Letaba Wireless, Potgieter Boerdery (Macridge), Madi-gra Water, Emmanuel Christian School, the Zoutpansberg Private Hospital, Ocean Basket, Barley and Jam, Delcovision, Chris James, GG-Horse Riding, National Velvet Apiaries, Wilfred Lawrence, SACM, Painted Horse Wildlife Photography, Limpopo Caterers, IsAbility Gauteng and Zoutnet (the Zoutpansberger).  “We also wish to thank every volunteer worker and our club members,” said Sandy. She also thanked the Soutpansberg Golf Club, their staff, golf captain Inus Steyn and club secretary Mare van der Merwe for their support and assistance, as well as all the golfers. 