“We do not have a single case of Covid-19 in this particular facility of inmates,” said the MEC for Health, Dr Phophi Ramathuba, when she visited the Sinthumule Kutama Correctional Facility on Monday. Dr Ramathuba was addressing rumours doing the rounds that almost a dozen cases of coronavirus infections had been recorded at the centre. She said that, in March this year, one of the nurses working at the facility had formed part of a team that had used a Portuguese cruise ship to travel to Mozambique. “As a department, we called all our members who were part of the cruise not to report for work. When she came back, she contacted us. She tested positive and was quarantined and isolated for 14 days and tested again. The results were negative. She is now free to report for work,” said Ramathuba. During Monday’s visit to the prison, Ramathuba was accompanied by the MEC for Transport and Community Safety, Ms Mavhungu Lerule-Ramakhanya, and the mayor of Makhado, Cllr Samuel Munyai. The purpose of the visit was to check compliance and to promote an awareness campaign at the facility. The Kutama Sinthumule Correctional Facility has 596 correctional service staff members and 3 024 inmates. The facility has 78 beds ready for isolation and 22 rooms for quarantine. According to Mr Dumisani Nzimande, the Prison Director, the cells are designed in such a way that social distancing is adhered to. Inmates have also started making their own masks. Dr Ramathuba expressed her satisfaction with the state of preparedness of the facility. She encouraged the management to improve on what was already in place. Asked whether people were complying with the Covid-19 regulations, Dr Ramathuba said that the majority of people were complying. “Those who are not (complying) are giving the coronavirus free transport from one individual to another. If we then get infected, we are surprised. So, please stay home,” she said. On Monday morning, 28 cases of Covid-19 infection had been confirmed in the Limpopo Province. Twenty-two of the cases have already recovered and one person has died. “So, there are now five confirmed (active) cases of Covid-19,” said Ramathuba. 