Although the Louis Trichardt SPCA does not often post all its rescues on Facebook, the past week they thought it a good idea to do so. “Many of these rescues happen late at night or on a weekend. We often call in some help from the public, vets, nature conservation, family members or anyone who might be able to assist us,” said the local SPCA’s Alicia Thomas. Thomas thanked every person who notifies them of cruelty or of animals suffering. “You are our eyes and ears and their voice. We would never know about these cases if it were not for you! Thank you!” said Thomas. In the same breath she also thanked senior inspector Lawrence Khodobo and all their kennel staff, who are always ready to jump in the SPCA bakkie, armed with nets, calming meds, food, or whatever may be needed in a rescue attempt. “Some rescues have happier endings than others, but we will always act in the best interest of the animal,” said Thomas. Thomas said that SPCAs were often mistaken for being just shelters for lost or unwanted pets. “But that is only a part of what we do. We are the Society for the Prevention of Cruelty to Animals – all animals,” said Thomas. Thomas said that they would always act within the laws stipulated in the Animal Protection Act 71 of 1962 and the Limpopo Environmental Management Act No 7 of 2003, and that they would like to highlight two very important points that can be found within this legislation. Firstly, no person may trade or keep captive an indigenous wild animal without the necessary permits. “It's against the law,” said Thomas. Secondly, all animals have the right to veterinary treatment. “It is against the law if you don't seek treatment for your sick animal,” Thomas said. The whole SPCA team again thanked everyone who is always willing to help them and to everyone who speaks up for those who cannot speak for themselves. Residents can now become even more involved. For an annual fee of just R100, a person can now become a member of the Louis Trichardt SPCA. “By becoming a member of the SPCA Louis Trichardt, you will have a vote at our annual AGM and your membership fee will enable us to continue the fight against animal cruelty and neglect,” said Thomas. For information on membership, phone Alicia at 084 900 5332, Lesley (071 545 5194), Grietjie (072 516 6895) or Lawrence (082 965 5151). 