The Zoutpansberg Private Hospital in Louis Trichardt has introduced several easy steps to follow in case of medical emergencies during the Covid-19 lockdown period. These measures will be applicable at the hospital until 10 April. Firstly, if you feel as if you have flu, the steps to follow are to look at the flu symptoms, such as a runny nose, WET cough, sore throat, body pain, headache and fever. For flu you can consult/phone your doctor only when necessary or consult/phone your pharmacist. Stay at home, maintain healthy hygiene and remember to wash your hands. If you start feeling sick during the lockdown period as a result of symptoms that include a fever, DRY cough, sore throat, body pain and constant tiredness, the steps to follow include staying at home, phoning your doctor or hospital and maintaining a social distance of 1,5 metres to 2 metres. Continue to wash your hands with soap and clean surfaces thoroughly that you share with others, such as light switches, door handles and toilets. If you start feeling VERY sick during the lockdown period because of continued symptoms such as fever, dry cough and difficulty breathing, the steps to follow are to phone the doctor or hospital, wear a mask (if you have one) when you come to the hospital or doctor and continue to maintain social distance. Continue to wash your hands with soap and water. At the consulting room or hospital, proceed to the screening area and follow the guidelines given by your doctor and laboratory. In case of casualties during lockdown, your doctor or ambulance service will inform the hospital of your arrival. At the hospital, pull into the allocated emergency parking space and move through to the screening area. PLEASE note that only the patient will be allowed into the hospital, and please respect clinical staff’s authority. If you need to visit the laboratory at the hospital for Covid-19 tests during the lockdown, your doctor will inform them of your arrival.  The testing will be done by Ampath. If you have a mask, wear it! Pull your car into the allocated parking space at the testing station and STAY IN YOUR CAR. After the test, GO DIRECTLY HOME, self-isolate and wait for the result. Please follow the guidelines given by your doctor and laboratory and again, respect clinical staff’s authority. If you need to visit the laboratory for regular tests during the lockdown, you must get a test form from your doctor. At the hospital, enter at the dedicated entrance. Move through the screening area to Ampath and again, respect the clinical staff’s authority. Regarding admissions, your doctor will inform the hospital of your admission. At the hospital, pull into the allocated emergency parking space and move through to the screening area. PLEASE note that only the patient will be allowed into the hospital. Maintain healthy hygiene and respect the clinical staff’s authority. If you want to visit a patient during lockdown, forget it. No visits will be allowed. The only exceptions are as follows: Birthing partner allowed ONLY with special arrangement; Nursery: only ONE parent at a time. No grandparents and siblings will be allowed to visit. Paediatrics: Only ONE parent at a time is permitted to live in with an admitted child. No grandparents and siblings will be allowed to visit. Terminally ill patients: an exception can be granted by the hospital manager and nursing manager. A minimal number of visitors will be granted this exception and they will be required to wear a mask. In case of death (not Covid-19 related) the hospital will assist to complete the notice of death. (DHA 1663). Inform the nursing staff of who the undertakers will be as the hospital will contact the undertakers for the transportation of the body. The undertakers will assist you with the notification of death, together with ID copies of the deceased and other forms you will be required to fill in with the Department of Home Affairs for registration, where a death certificate will be issued (DHA 5). In case of deaths related to Covid-19, everything is the same as above, but bereavement guidelines will also be available. Please be warned that the Department of Environmental Affairs will become involved, so respect their authority.  