Members of Project TNR (TrapNeuterReturn) in Louis Trichardt are angry – very angry! During the lockdown period, one resident seems to be keeping himself busy by doing some target practice on the town’s feral cat population. At about 20:30 on Saturday, 25 April, members of Project TNR were contacted about one of their cats. He had returned home badly wounded. The cat named Benjamin, who lives in the Kock Street area, was immediately taken to the Blouberg Animal Clinic. Upon closer examination, Benjamin’s wounds were confirmed as having been caused by a gunshot. He had two wounds: one to his chest and the other wound was in the area of the right shoulder. Ms Marinda van der Walt of the local Project TNR confirmed on Monday that the wounds had been caused by a bigger calibre gun than an airgun, probably a .22-caliber. The bullet had gone straight through Benjamin. Members of Project TNR warned members of the public that, according to the Firearms Control Act, Act 60 of 2000 as amended, discharging a firearm in a residential area is illegal. Section 120 (1) (a), read with Section 120 (3) (b), states that discharging or otherwise handling a firearm in a manner likely to injure or endanger the safety or property of any person or with reckless disregard for the safety or property of any person is illegal. Section 120 (7) of the Act also states that discharging a firearm in a built-up area or any public place, without good reason to do so, is an offense. Members of Project TNR Louis Trichardt have subsequently reported the matter to the South African Police Services and the local SPCA. “This cowardly act of animal cruelty is abominable,” said the group of TNR volunteers. “Benjamin is still alive, but in pain,” said Van der Walt. They remain hopeful that Benjamin will make a full recovery. “We rescued Benjamin when he was still a kitten … and eventually found him a loving home. Our hearts bleed for him,” said the TNR team. Members of Project TNR urged members of the public to contact them if they have any information about the shooting of Benjamin. They can send a WhatsApp to 076 898 1994 and remain anonymous if they wish. 