The head boy and head girl of Louis Trichardt High School sent in messages of hope this week for learners stuck at home because of the nationwide lockdown amidst the Covid-19 pandemic. “Even though this pandemic is affecting some of us more than others, just remember we're all in this together. See it as an opportunity to focus on yourself and to learn how to operate on your own and be more independent. Always remember ... No pressure, no diamonds,” said head boy Calvin Lee. “To all my fellow Triegies: I know this is a strange and difficult time for all of us. I know that we honestly don't know anything about what might happen to us as a country at this time. And I'm sorry about that,” said head girl Lynique Krüger. She continued: “I just want to remind each and every one of you how important and amazing you are. Stay strong and believe in yourself because we as Triegies can do anything. We're a family and we'll stay strong together. I know we all miss our friends and are concerned about our futures, especially my fellow matrics, but I know this is all worth it. Take care of yourselves, stay safe and stay home. Work on improving your mental health and being more confident in your schoolwork and yourself. In a month or so, we're going to look back at this and laugh, knowing we survived. We all love you, and we appreciate you. Good luck and never forget: one school, one goal. God bless you!” In the meantime, Louis Trichardt High School has made available several online platforms to assist learners to keep up to date with their schoolwork amidst the lockdown. This week, the school urged learners to download their new app through which they want to share important information. “The app is available from both the Google Play Store (https://goo.gl/sXjKhk) and Apple Store (https://goo.gl/1r56Qa). Register with your own e-mail address and password and chose our school from the list of schools,” said the school. The school said this was just another way for them to communicate with their learners during the lockdown period. “There are already numerous other WhatsApp groups for different subjects, as well as teachers teaching via the Zoom application,” said the school. The school reiterated the fact that they are using these online platforms to make learning material available to learners. “A lot of the work will be repeated in class because not all learners have access to data and the Internet,” said the school. They added that the Department of Basic Education was also working on plans to retrieve lost school time. “There is a lot of media speculation about this. We will supply more accurate information on this as soon as there is more clarity from the department,” said the school. In the meantime, Louis Trichardt High School urged parents to keep on paying school fees. “This will prevent you from falling behind. It will also allow the school to keep on paying their monthly expenses. We appreciate your co-operation in this regard,” said the school. 