The ANC Vhembe Region has recommended that an executive member of the Makhado Municipality, Cllr Tebogo Mamorobela, be temporarily suspended. Mamorobela was captured on video the past weekend while celebrating her 39th birthday at friends. “The ANC Vhembe Region has learnt with shock and dismay of the alleged misconduct by one of its councillors. As an organization, we are carefully scrutinizing all the allegations including the circulating video clips,” reads a press release issued on Thursday. According to the spokesperson for the ANC Vhembe Region, Tshifhiwa Dali, they strongly condemn any form of behaviour that seeks to undermine the government’s efforts to curb the spread of the coronavirus. “The Political Management Team (PMT) of the municipality, after reporting the allegations to the ANC, met with the councillor this morning and informed her of their decision, taking into consideration the sensitivity of the gross misconduct allegations at hand,” he said. The steps recommended by the PMT are: * That the councillor must recuse herself from the activities of the municipality with immediate effect until the matter is finalized by the court. * That since she is a fulltime councillor, the ANC will appoint a councillor to act on her behalf. * A month’s salary should be deducted from her allowance. * The matter will be referred to the Ethics committee for further processing. * Mamorobela must issue a public apology through electronic and print media and all forms of social media. “As an organization we are pleased that our deployed PMT at the Municipality acted swiftly. We strongly believe that this will send a strong warning to all our councillors that we should lead exemplary lives and respect all decisions of the central government and the ANC,” said Dali. Dali added that the matter was reported to the provincial office. Cllr Tebogo Mamorobela holds a very senior position in the council and, on occasion, performed duties as acting mayor of the Makhado Municipality. She is part of the executive committee where she is Head of Corporate Services. The leader of the Democratic Party in Limpopo, Jacques Smalle, laid charges at the Makhado police station against Mamorobela for violating the lockdown regulations on Tuesday. In response to the recommendation that Mamorobela be suspended, Smalle said the DA welcome the recommendations. “But we still want the law to run its course regarding the contravention of the lockdown regulations which carries a fine or even a prison sentence. This also applies to all the other people identified in the video,” Smalle said.