The Department of Trade, Industry and Competition has reminded companies, which are registered through the Companies and Intellectual Property Commission's (CIPC)’s BizPortal to perform essential services during the lockdown period, that they will be required to obtain a new certificate for the extended period, which began on 17 April. According to a press release issued on behalf of the department, the certificate will be sent via email using the details provided at the time of registration, and is also available for download. The department said that the full list of companies that have registered will have received their certificates by the weekend. “The new certificate will clearly state that it is for the extended lockdown period, beginning 17 April 2020, and the South African Police Service officials will be told which certificates to look for. Certificates issued before today will no longer be valid and must be disposed of. To provide time for businesses to adjust to the new requirements, the new certificates will be available to be displayed from start of business on Monday, 20 April 2020,” said the department. The department reminded the public that possession of the CIPC certificate is still subject to the company fully complying with the applicable Lockdown Regulations and is a record of the company’s details, and does not in itself constitute the right to continue operating during the period. “Only businesses which provide essential services in terms of the Lockdown Regulations, as amended, issued by the Minister for Cooperative Governance and Traditional Affairs, may continue their operations during the COVID-19 lockdown,” said the department. The department clarified that the registration portal is only for companies registered in terms of the Companies Act. Other essential service providers, like healthcare professionals registered with the Health Professions Council of South Africa, sole proprietors who provide essential goods and services (like small business owners and spaza shops), and small-scale farmers will not register through the Bizportal. “Where the CIPC finds that certificates have been issued to companies which do not meet the definitions of an essential service, such certificate will be revoked, and the company will be referred to the South African Police Services. False declaration by the company is a criminal offence and will result in prosecution, in terms of Lockdown Regulations,” warned the department.