A video that started circulating on social media early this week may turn out to be a major embarrassment for local ANC structures. One of Vhembe’s foremost political leaders allegedly defied the Covid-19 lockdown rules to have a birthday party at a friend’s house. To make matters worse, the video shows the partygoers singing songs mocking the minister of police, Bheki Cele. The video that started circulating on Monday shows a birthday party at a house in Louis Trichardt where a member of the executive committee of the Makhado Municipality, Cllr Tebogo Mamorobela, is present. Cllr Mamorobela can be seen dancing in the video, next to a table filled with liquor bottles. She celebrated her 39th birthday on Sunday. “Hey ... 39 has never looked this good -- beautiful!” Mamorobela can be heard saying. Others then shout “birthday girl! [laughter] 'Khou vhona Bheki Cele o da hafha (Bheki Cele might soon come here)'.” Amidst more laughter, the partygoers say: “Ce! (short for Cele) Bheki Cele!” [then laugh] “It's a big problem, Bheki Cele, come see the problem!”. While dancing, Cllr Mamorobela then shouts: “... uthini uCele!?” This means “What is it that Cele is saying” but in context can mean “What will Cele do to us?” The people present at the festivities include a prominent local businessman. Mamorobela holds a very senior position in the council and, on occasion, performed duties as acting mayor of the Makhado Municipality. She is part of the executive committee where she is Head of Corporate Services. She is also a Brand SA ambassador, and on Brand SA’s website her achievements are listed. Her political career started at the South African Youth Council (SAYC) and the South African Students Congress (SASCO). She served in the ANCYL Provincial Executive Committee of Limpopo as an executive member from 2012 to 2014. She has served as the deputy chairperson of the ANC Makhado sub-region since 2018 and is the convener of the ANCWL Young Woman Desk of Limpopo. Once Limpopo Mirror/Zoutpansberger became aware of the video, the Makhado Municipality’s spokesperson, Mr Louis Bobodi, was contacted for comment. He suggested at first that Cllr Mamorobela be contacted for comment. When the paper pointed out to him that she is a senior office bearer of the municipality and, as such, represents the council, Bobodi requested that the questions be sent to him. This was done early on Tuesday. By Wednesday, when Bobodi still had not responded, he was contacted again. He then said that he did not check emails and requested that the questions be sent again via WhatsApp. This was done, upon which he only responded that the council would conduct an own investigation and only respond at a later stage. He also confirmed that the councillor had not been suspended. What became clear was that the matter had become a red herring for local ANC structures as the day progressed. When the ANC’s media liaison officer for the Vhembe region, Mr David Mukobi, was contacted, he referred the inquiry to the regional spokesperson for the ANC, Mr Tshifhiwa Dali. He was not available and could only be traced the next morning. He then referred Limpopo Mirror/Zoutpansberger to the ANC regional secretary, Adv Anderson Mudunungu. Adv Mudunungu responded by saying that they were busy investigating the matter and that they would take action, should that be necessary. Several calls were made to try and contact Cllr Mamorobela on Tuesday. She did not answer, and questions were sent to her via WhatsApp. These were not answered either. Late on Tuesday afternoon, the Democratic Alliance’s provincial leader, Mr Jacques Smalle, laid charges at the Makhado police station against Mamorobela for violating the lockdown regulations. A copy of the video was also handed to the SAPS. “We decided to lay the charges after Minister Ndabeni-Abrahams’s sanction clearly showed that the ANC will not discipline their own members in accordance with the seriousness of the offence committed. Furthermore, no one is above the law and the lockdown regulations are there to save lives and must be taken seriously,” said Smalle. The DA also called upon the councillor to apologise publicly for her behaviour. On Wednesday, the ANC’s regional spokesperson, Mr Tshifhiwa Dali, said that a press conference would be held on Thursday at 10:00 in Thohoyandou, during which the issue would be discussed. 