In what seems to be an example of extremely bad planning of a distribution network, a road in Louis Trichardt is effectively blocked off by trucks. Neighbouring businessowners battle to access their businesses and their customers must either negotiate a way through the trucks or shop somewhere else. The problem seems to stem from a decision by the distribution partner of Coca-Cola Beverages South Africa (CCBSA) to move its distribution warehouse in Louis Trichardt to rented premises in Meyer Street. The warehouse makes little or no provision for big trucks to enter. From what could be established the move to a new warehouse took place about a year ago, but in the last couple of months the problems just got worse. Big trucks offloading stock combined with smaller trucks loading the crates, caused logistical problems. Currently the public road is being used as a loading platform, much to the frustration of other motorists. This short street in a semi-industrial part of town was already partly blocked off by big trucks awaiting their turn to enter the milling company’s premises on the opposite side of the warehouse. With the addition of dozens of small and big trucks arriving every day to load and off-load crates, the situation has simply become chaotic. The spokesperson for the Makhado Municipality, Mr Louis Bobodi, said on Tuesday that they were aware of the situation and that traffic officials had been dispatched to issue tickets. “In addition, they will keep on monitoring the situation,” he said. CCBSA’s media department was also contacted and asked about the situation in Louis Trichardt. “Coca-Cola Beverages South Africa (CCBSA) considers this complaint in a very serious light and is committed to resolving the matter with its local distribution partner. Our team will investigate immediately and implement the necessary corrective action over the coming weeks,” the company said. On Tuesday, the situation was still the same, with the road just about inaccessible in the early morning.