The Democratic Alliance (DA) in Limpopo said they were very concerned that the Department of Agriculture and Rural Development had identified more premises as positive for Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) in January 2020. According to the DA’s Mr Jacques Smalle (MPL and the DA Limpopo spokesperson on agriculture and rural development) the total number of locations positively confirmed for FMD has risen to 16 since the outbreak in November 2019. The number of livestock affected now stands at 27 000. “The lingering outbreak is maintaining a nationwide moratorium on livestock auctions, which is causing economic havoc in the red-meat industries. Low prices for beef, job losses in the industry and a ban on auctions are exacerbated by the persistent drought. The DA has been reliably informed that farmers now lose up to R3 500 per head of cattle as a result of the FMD,” said Smalle in a press release. He added that the losses in the industry had run up to billions of rands and the department did not seem to have a clear plan to curtail the current outbreak outside the red zone and to control livestock efficiently within the red zone. “The DA is calling for the Department of Agriculture to urgently adopt and implement the World Organization for Animal Health’s (OIE) guidelines on Livestock Identification and Traceability Systems (LITS). A well-managed LITS will broaden the scope of animal recording and adopt a multipurpose approach that integrates animal identification and registration, animal traceability, animal health information, and performance recording,” said Smalle. Smalle added that the lack of bio-security control measures was further threatening the agricultural industry as a whole, which included game farming, and this was a huge cause for concern. “A well-regulated and controlled red-meat industry in Limpopo has huge export potential, which in turn will be a catalyst to job creation and prosperity for all our farmers,” said Smalle. Smalle’s call comes during the same week as the announcement by the minister of Agriculture, Land Reform and Rural Development, Ms Thoko Didiza, that an auctioneer from Limpopo, Sors Snyman from Alldays, had been arrested for allegedly deliberately spreading FMD in the province of Limpopo. “The outbreak of Foot and Mouth Disease (FMD) in the Limpopo Province has had a devastating effect on the economy of the country as a whole, and it is estimated that it has costed (sic) a lot of money, with the most severe effects felt by the red meat industry,” said Didiza in a press release. Snyman was charged with the alleged contravention of the Animals Diseases Act of 1984 (Act No 35 of 1984) and appeared in the Mogwadi (Dendron) Magistrate’s Court on 27 January. His case was postponed until 23 March and he was released on R10 000 bail. Snyman allegedly knowingly received cloven-hoofed animals that were moved out of the FMD-controlled area and had subsequently sold and moved those animals at various auctions and to various individuals in the Vivo and Mogwadi areas. Meanwhile, people in the red-meat industry are increasingly calling on Minister Didiza to lift the total ban on livestock auctions. This follows the Department of Agriculture’s gazetting of a national ban on the gathering of cloven-hoofed animals, including livestock auctions, on 4 December last year. The managing director of the National Emergent Red-meat Producers Organisation (NERPO), Mr Aggrey Mahanjana, said in a media statement the damage that had been caused by the ban was too ghastly to contemplate. “More than 90% of the emerging farmers use livestock public auctions as their only livestock marketing channel and price-determining mechanism. Since the ban, which happened during the month of December 2019, proceeding to 2020 January, farmers whose livelihood depends on the livestock are facing a devastating future,” said Mahanjana. He agreed with Smalle’s call for a system to identify livestock. “The industry and the department must come up with a solution that controls the movement of animals, and that system must include a livestock-identification and traceability system,” said Mahanjana. He believes that the ban is too drastic. 