The Soutpansberg was one of the stops along Dr André Hattingh’s Ride for a Child project that “kick-started” in Mpumalanga last week. Pediatric Care Africa’s Dr André left Witrivier on 15 February on his road king Harley Davidson and will travel South Africa for an approximate distance of 5600km, visiting the most northern, southern, eastern and western points accessible by road bike during this epic trip. On Sunday, he stayed over at the Lalapanzi Hotel outside Louis Trichardt. The purpose of this mega “Ride for a Child” charity ride is to generate funds for Paediatric Care Africa’s 1000 surgeries for 1000 children campaign and to raise awareness of the plight of children who require surgeries and simply cannot get help. Dr André will ride the entire route and distance of about 5 600km and Pediatric Care Africa invited guest riders and motorbike clubs across South Africa to join him anywhere on his route. Dr André is a dad of three and a grandfather of four and is challenging all (grand)parents to ride along for a section of the route as sponsored riders, whereby they are sponsored for R1 per km by a friend, a company or themselves to benefit this charity ride. Example: Guest rider travels for with Dr André from Ermelo to Nelspruit for 210km and back home for 210km, so the guest rider will then be sponsored for 420km = R420. “We are making an appeal to companies and private persons to sponsor Dr André and/or guest riders for R1 per kilometre they complete, and sponsor documents for companies and guest riders will be available on our website soon,” said Pediatric Care Africa in a statement on their website https://www.pediatriccareafrica.org/. More information is also available on this website about the project. The R1 per kilometre will no doubt assist Pediatric Care Africa to arrange surgeries for poor children. Some of the surgeries required range from grommets in their ears to heart-valve replacement and anything in between. “We as bike riders of South Africa can save countless lives of children that cannot receive surgery or medical treatment, simply because they are too poor!” said Pediatric Care Africa.