The Khoroni Hotel, Casino and Convention Resort is open for business once more. Settled in a lush garden setting in Thohoyandou, the resort’s reopening is in accordance with provisions as stipulated by the Department of Health (DOH) and World Health Organisation (WHO). According to a media statement by the resort, precautionary measures for entering include wearing a face mask or shield at all times, daily temperature screening (if a temperature of 37.5ºC and higher is recorded, access will not be permitted), record keeping of guests at entrances, thorough and regular cleaning of all areas and touch points, and the deployment of extra hand sanitiser dispensers to key public areas. The resort’s gaming activities had reportedly resumed, with a limited number of players per tables game and alternate slot machines being disabled to ensure adherence to social distancing requirements. To manage capacity effectively, access to the various gaming areas is limited to Winners Circle loyalty members. The hotel is open to business travellers, as per government legislation. The breakfast buffet offering at the chic Malingani Restaurant is replaced by individually packaged food items, and tables are spaced out to adhere to social distancing. According to the statement, all hotel rooms are deep cleaned with utmost care and hygienically sealed, with all non-essential, high-touch-point items being removed. The Convention Centre, Spa by Camelot and remaining leisure facilities will open in due course. “We are excited to reopen and to welcome guests to Khoroni. Peace of mind remains paramount during these uncertain times, and that is why we have enforced a multi-layered set of protocols and procedures to ensure the well-being and safety of our guests. In addition, our employees have also been fully briefed and trained on best practices,” comments Mark Single, acting general manager at the resort. * Khoroni proudly supports the National Responsible Gambling Programme. Call the Problem Gambling Counselling Toll-Free Helpline on 0800 006 008 for support. Players must be 18 years or older. 