The director of Braambos Primary School at Air Force Base Makhado, Ms Natanya Barends, hailed the management of the base under the leadership of Brigadier General André Barends for the assistance rendered in support of the Department of Education. Speaking during the welcoming of the Grade 7 learners back to the school on 8 June, Barends thanked both the parents and the teachers for their team effort in ensuring that everything was in place before the learners returned. “They have displayed a selfless character while striving to prepare the future of the learners,” Ms Barends said. This follows an instruction issued by the Minister of Basic Education, Ms Angie Motshekga, which allows the Grade 12 and 7 learners to go back to school. “As an interim measure, a meeting with parents of the learners was conducted for them to clear the air and prepare learners to go back to school. A WhatsApp group was created for all parents and learners, so they could receive first-hand information during this time,” said Ms Barends. According to Ms Barends, the most complex and challenging issue discussed was the safety of learners at school. This led to an exchange of ideas by all stakeholders to address the fears of learners and their parents. The school principal, Ms Mashianoke Masehla, confirmed that preparations for learners to return to school were started as early as May. “The school is monitored frequently by the officer in charge of the health centre, Lt-Col Machete Makhaga,” said Masehla. Since the learners returned, strict controls regarding procedures for sanitising, screening, disinfecting the classrooms and checking the temperature of learners, teachers, staff members and anyone who visits the school daily have been in place. Visitors to the school are also required to sign a register at the locked gate to gain entry. The school learning programme is conducted with ease on a daily basis, while learners are encouraged to apply social distancing, wear masks and sanitise all the time. “Anyone found with an abnormal temperature is referred to the health centre for further observation,” stated Ms Masehla. 