Eskom has announced that Stage 2 load shedding will commence on Friday, 10 July, from 12:00 onwards. The areas affected will be: FROM 12:00 UNTIL 13:00 Mukondeni, Mashamba, Tshivhuyuni, Mulima, Nthabalala, Tshitale, Muwaweni, Mbhokota, Riverplats, Botlokwa and Soekmekaar. FROM 13:00 UNTIL 15:30 Malamulele areas, including Mangondi, Mulenzhe, Hlanganani areas, Masia, Majozi, Tiyani, Mahatlani, Bungeni, Basani, Nwamatatani, Olifantshoek, Masakona, Njhakajhaka, Nkuzana and Giyani. FROM 15:00 UNTIL 17:30 Louis Trichardt, Levubu, Valdezia, Elim areas, Waterval, Chavani, Vleifontein, Ximausa, Blinkwater and Rotterdam, Mashau, Vuwani areas, Nesengani, Madombidzha areas and Sinthumule areas. FROM 17:00 UNTIL 19:30 Tshakhuma, Lwamondo, Shayandima, Muledane, Thohoyandou, Sibasa, Ngovhela, Phiphidi, Gondeni, Vhufuli, Vondwe, Makonde, Tshikweta Thengwe, Sanari, Makuya, Masisi, Malale, Madimbo, Muswodi and all Mutale areas. THE FOLLOWING AREAS WILL NOT BE AFFECTED TODAY: Musina town, Nancefield, Leeudraai, Tshipise Forever Resort, Pontdrif, Alldays, Soutpan, Bochum and all Nzhelele villages. According to a press statement issued by Eskom, the load shedding is due to the increase in generation unit breakdowns. The load shedding will take place until 22:00 today. “This load shedding has been caused by an increase in plant breakdown exceeding 3 000MW of capacity. Eskom is working hard to return as many of these generation units to service,” said Eskom. “While five generation units were taken off the grid last night and this morning, a breakdown at the Matimba power station has today resulted in the need for load shedding. Two units at the Arnot power station, as well as a unit each at Kendal, Tutuka and Majuba were taken off the grid last night and this morning,” added Eskom. Eskom urged the public to continue reducing electricity usage to help them minimise load shedding. “We also request the public to reduce electricity usage between 16:00 and 22:00 in order to assist is in limiting the incidence of load shedding. Over the past two evenings the help of the public assisted us in avoiding the need for load shedding. With your help Eskom can again recover from this much quicker,” said Eskom.