As if South Africans do not have enough to worry about amidst the chaos caused by the Covid-19 pandemic, they have also been warned not to use too much energy. The South African National Energy Development Institute (SANEDI) has urged South Africans to use energy sparingly as the country entered Stage 4 of the Covid-19 lockdown restrictions that will see a gradual increase in demand, particularly in the mining industry and other companies that will be starting to operate. “Across the globe, electricity demand has, due to lockdown and confinement measures, declined by an estimated 15%.  In South Africa, the lockdown has led to a drop of 30% in energy demand (7 500 MW a day) as energy-intensive mining and manufacturing industries, which account for about 60% of national consumption, have not been fully operational,” said the SANEDI in a press statement earlier this week. The institute has warned that the phased unlocking of the economy, coupled with the imminent colder winter months, will lead to an increase in energy consumption and a subsequent strain on the power grid.  “We must, at all costs, avoid moving into another bout of load shedding which we experienced prior to lockdown,” said the interim chairperson of the SANEDI, Nkululeko Buthelezi. Buthelezi encouraged all South African households and businesses to use energy wisely and to avoid unnecessary wastage of this valuable resource. “Where possible, energy-efficient practices must be implemented to lessen the strain and optimise usage,” he said. The best energy efficiency advice, said the SANEDI, is to always ensure that energy-consuming appliances and devices that are not in use are switched off. “Other easily implementable and short-term attainable energy efficiency practices include switching over to energy-saving LED globes, using LPG (liquefied petroleum gas) for cooking and heating, as well as always purchasing energy-efficient appliances, which are clearly indicated in the form of an Energy Efficient Appliance Label, displayed on most domestic appliances for sale, when allowed to do so under the lock-down regulations,” said the SANEDI. The organisation stresses that load shedding will have a devastating effect not only on the recovering economy, but also on the health services, such as quarantine and isolation facilities, as well as those convalescing at home. “We must emphasise the need for everyone to work together, just as we have stood together as a nation to fight the virus. We urge people to switch off non-essential appliances and to become more aware of how we use energy over the next few months,” said Buthelezi. 