As some readers might remember from past articles, the samango monkey in the Soutpansberg area faces a threat of getting killed by vehicles. Since 2012, some 21 samango monkeys have been found killed on the R524 between Louis Trichardt and Thohoyandou. The monkeys are forest dwelling and generally spend most of their time high up in the tree canopy. They descend to the ground only when necessary. Roads bisecting or running close to the samango monkey’s forest habitat can be one reason why the monkeys are forced to the ground when moving between forest patches. The samango monkey subspecies found up in Limpopo Province is listed as endangered in the Red List of Mammals of South Africa, Swaziland and Lesotho, and direct threats to local populations through road fatalities are therefore a conservation concern. To establish how being hit by vehicles can be mitigated through the use of crossing structures, an experimental study was conducted at the Lajuma Research Centre in the western Soutpansberg, testing two different canopy bridge designs, namely solid pole bridges versus rope ladder bridges. “Here we wanted to establish which design the samango monkeys preferred and if species other than the samango monkey could also potentially benefit from road-crossing structures,” said project leader Ms Bibi Linden. Results from the experiment showed that the monkeys clearly preferred crossing roads on solid pole bridges to the rope-ladder bridges. Camera traps mounted at the experimental crossing structures further revealed that other animal species, such as lesser bush babies, greater bush babies, vervet monkeys, baboons, dassies (hyraxes), rodents, and even geckos also used the pole bridges. “The experiment clearly suggests that canopy-crossing structures at roadkill hotspots could be a viable intervention to mitigate samango monkey road fatalities,” said Linden. She added that the next step of the project would be to design a prototype bridge according to the specifications given by the roads agency and to get engineers involved in helping to design a structure that can be installed at the actual road-crossing hotspots on the R524 in future. “We would like to thank all people who have so far helped us with this project by recording samango monkey roadkills, donating funds for bumper stickers and generally helping to raise awareness.  The samango monkey roadkill mitigation project is further kindly supported by the Endangered Wildlife Trust’s (EWT) Wildlife and Transport Programme, headed by Wendy Collinson, who is also resident in the Soutpansberg area,” said Linden. She also asked the public again to please report any samango monkey roadkills to her at Tel 071 1058117 (and if possible, record a GPS point for example by using a Google Earth drop pin). 