The nationwide lockdown has brought with it many challenges for everyone, especially financial challenges. “Animal welfare organisations are no exception. SPCAs and shelters across our country are facing, and will do so for some time to come, extreme financial challenges. We say it so often, but during times like these, our community never lets us down and we stand amazed, humbled and extremely grateful for each of you,” said Alicia Thomas of the Louis Trichardt SPCA. As everybody knows by now, the local SPCA committee will do almost anything to raise much-needed funds for the animals in their care and to help them with the daily fight against animal cruelty. “So, when a well-known member of our community, Elize Pretorius, contacted us with her idea to help us raise funds, we were super excited to get going and for more people to join in the fun!” said Alicia. Elize’s idea saw the birth of the Louis Trichardt SPCA’s “Run for THEIR Lives Challenge”. “Yes, it’s time for a new challenge, but this time you won’t have to swallow a raw egg; in fact, we prefer that you have it cooked as a part of a healthy breakfast before you partake,” said Alicia. As the challenge’s name suggests, some exercise is to be expected. “If you are nominated, you can decide on the distance you would like to run, cycle or swim. It can be on a treadmill, around your house, on a farm road or in a pool or dam. As long as you have fun and make sure to keep it going,” said Alicia. The idea is to get a sponsorship from anyone to sponsor the nominee for each kilometre (or meters for some) he or she completes. Once they have completed their challenge, they then get to make nominations too. “Post your videos on Facebook and tag Alicia Thomas,” said Alicia. Every nominee has the responsibility to see to it that their sponsorship money gets paid into SPCA Louis Trichardt’s account under the reference “Run” and the nominee’s name. The banking details are SPCA Louis Trichardt, Standard Bank, cheque account number 282 374 639 and branch code 05 25 49. “We’re brainstorming an exciting prize for the person who is able to raise the most money for our SPCA before the lockdown order is lifted,” said Alicia. Elize did not just create the Run for THEIR Lives Challenge, she was also the first to get the blood pumping. “She completed a 5km run on Sunday morning and made her nominations to keep it going.  It’s only been a few days, but this challenge has already drawn a lot of attention, with new nominations coming in thick and fast – you might be next,” said Alicia. The SPCA committee thanked everyone who has accepted the challenge so far and for keeping it going. “You are helping us to make a difference in the lives of those who cannot speak for themselves, in a time when they need you most,” said Alicia. She invited readers to check out their Facebook page for all the videos and nominations at https://www.facebook.com/SPCA-Louis-Trichardt-109664612517237/ 