On Saturday, 24 October, local para-athletes (athletes with physical impairments or challenges) will have the opportunity to be evaluated and provisionally classified for para-athletics sport in Louis Trichardt. The day’s proceedings will be restricted to limited numbers because of Covid-19, and all the requirements of the International Paralympic Committee’s guideline document regarding hygiene and infection control in times of Covid-19 will be adhered to. Classification of para-athletes is essential for any disabled athlete who wishes to participate at provincial, national, or international level. This also provides a stepping stone for those who do not necessarily want to participate in sport at a competitive level but who wish to make contact with other disabled people who want to participate in various sporting codes for fun and for the maintenance of a healthy lifestyle. This is a Limpopo provincial classification event where Louisa Kirsten, one of South Africa’s international para-athletics classifiers, will provisionally classify prospective adult athletes with a provincial classification. These athletes would then be able to attend a national event where a panel of classifiers would evaluate the athlete and give him or her a national classification, thereby enabling the athlete to participate at internationally sanctioned events for international classification. A similar classification event for children will be held later this year. On the same day, Kotie Pienaar, a Gauteng wheelchair athlete who is a medallist at previous International Wheelchair Association games in Dubai, will be available to give athletes some guidelines with regard to disciplines such as javelin, shotput and discus throwing. The day’s activities will be run from 08:00 until 15:30 and the venue is still to be confirmed.  The local IsAbility Limpopo Sports Club is facilitating the classification and coaching by bringing the different stakeholders together. Anyone who is perhaps not interested in athletics but would like to learn how to become involved in other sports such as wheelchair tennis etc, can contact the club to be linked up with relevant structures and contacts.  The club has invited anyone with any form of disability, wishing to be classified or to learn more about the opportunities for participation in sports and the classification requirements, to feel free to contact Sandy James (084 506 3333 / 015 516 9856) or Louisa Kirsten (083 561 5983) or e-mail is.ability.limpopo@gmail.com. 