Joseph Makamu is a taxi driver who transports learners from Nancefield location to Gateway Primary School in Musina. Over the years, he was worried about the poor condition of the Harper Road, which is the only and convenient way to the school. But to Makamu and thousands of other road users, their worries will now be a thing the past after De Beers Venetia Mine supplied R14,5 million to refurbish the road. Following eight months of construction work, the road was finally completed, officially opened, and handed over to the public on Monday morning (19 October).  The handing-over ceremony was led by Musina Mayor Mihloti Muhlope and the general manager of De Beers Venetia Mine, Mr Gerrie Nortjé. The scope of work included earthworks, asphalting, installing prefabricated culverts, road markings, erecting road signs, and landscaping. Raubex Construction was appointed the main contractor of the project. During the event, Muhlope said the upgrading and completion of the 2,2 km stretch of the road helped to ease the financial burden on Musina Municipality. She said a continued investment in roads was certainly a worthwhile one. “Our municipality has serious challenges in relation to the shortage of resources and manpower, but we feel very happy when our partners come on board in initiatives like this one. This project, like many of its kind, is a testimony of what can be achieved through partnerships between government and the mining sector in the delivery of essential socio-economic infrastructure to the citizens of Musina,” she said. She added that the opening of the Harper Road would help to redirect traffic from Musina’s CBD. “At times, our town is very congested because the busy N1 road passes through our town. As Musina Municipality, we really appreciate this gesture from De Beers Venetia Mine.” The General Manager Nortjé said the mine would continue to empower the areas in which they operated. He said their social and labour plan made provision for the resources and financial assistance to their labour-sending areas. “We are happy to contribute to the development of the local communities by ploughing back through projects like this one.  I’m happy to announce that we will have another project to rehabilitate various streets in Musina town, starting from this month (October) until March next year,” he said. 